+++
title = "About Ryan X. Charles LLC"
author = "Ryan X. Charles"
date = "2024-05-16"
+++

EarthBucks is created by Ryan X. Charles LLC, which is wholly owned by Ryan
X. Charles, an American entrepreneur.

## My History

After learning to program at age 10, I later graduated from the University of
Missouri-Columbia with a double major in physics and mathematics, and then spent
six years in physics graduate school at Washington University in St. Louis
before quitting in 2013 to [work full-time on
Bitcoin](https://youtu.be/6F57HIxQuMo). I joined BitPay in September 2013 as a
software engineer. BitPay offered the ability to accept part of your salary in
Bitcoin, which I embraced by becoming the first person to accept my full salary
in Bitcoin at BitPay, and probably the first in the world.

I worked on the full-stack BitPay software in node.js/Mongo (callback pyramids
and undefined is not a function), and transitioned into working on what would
become [bitcore](https://github.com/bitpay/bitcore), a set of open-source tools
for working with Bitcoin.

After helping to start Copay, the BitPay wallet, later renamed to just "BitPay",
I left BitPay to join reddit in September 2014 as the world's first officially
titled "cryptocurrency engineer". At reddit, I worked on
[fullnode](https://github.com/reddit-archive/fullnode), what would have been the
reddit cryptocurrency wallet, and "reddit notes", a project that would have put
reddit cryptocurrency into the hands of every reddit user. Unfortunately, reddit
was experiencing a lot of turmoil at the time, including the resignation of two
CEOs, and I was laid off and the project was never finished.

I joined BitGo as a software engineer and worked on the full-stack BitGo wallet
software in node.js/Mongo. While at BitGo, I wrote a popular article about
decentralizing reddit that gave me a hint that I should start my own company. So
I left BitGo to found what was at first called Datt, and later Yours.org (now
owned by unrelated entities), a decentralized social network that used
micropayments to reward content creators.

Yours.org would go on to get traction with a small but dedicated user base. We
raised two rounds of funding, including a $1.5 million raise that was led by
Bitmain. I was involved in the Bitcoin block size wars of 2017 and very publicly
switched the company's technology from Bitcoin to Litecoin that year due to
fees. After the launch of Bitcoin Cash, I again switch the underlying
technology, this time to Bitcoin Cash. Yours.org was the first app to use
Bitcoin Cash in 2017.

After running this project on Bitcoin Cash for a few months, it became clear
that there was a need for a developer tool to do micropayments on Bitcoin Cash,
so I pivoted Yours.org to create Money Button, a "simple payment system", which
was basically an entire wallet inside a button that made it very easy for
developers to copy+paste a wallet into their apps.

I was again involved in another blockchain war in late 2018 as Bitcoin Cash
would split to create Bitcoin SV. I decided to support Bitcoin SV, and again my
company was the first to adopt a new blockchain, this time Bitcoin SV.

Money Button achieved greater success than Yours.org and was ultimately acquired
by The Bayesian Group in 2020.

I left The Bayesian Group in early 2021, which by then had been renamed to
Fabriik. After that, I worked on various small projects, but mostly took a lot
of time off to recover from the stress of running a startup and reflect on what
I wanted to do next.

In early 2024, after creating [Artintellica](https://artintellica.com), a social
network for AI agents, it became clear to me there was still a need for small
casual transactions in the range of 1 US cent to 5 US dollars to provide an
alternative to monthly subscriptions in the AI revolution. I decided to pivot my
emphasis from AI back to blockchain to create EarthBucks to solve this problem.

My intention with EarthBucks is not just to create a new blockchain for small
casual transactions, but also to create new AI apps that uniquely leverage this
way of making payments for experiences not otherwise possible with credit cards.

## Fund Raising

EarthBucks is owned by Ryan X. Charles LLC, but I plan to create a new
corporation to own the IP after launch. The new corporation will raise money. If
you are interested in investing in this project, or if you are interested in
working together on the business in some other respect, please feel free to
contact me at [company@ryanxcharles.com](mailto:company@ryanxcharles.com).
